ʃnũ˥˩(causative prefix+’face’)‘bring down (from)’ 	The verb above combines with the nominal lexical element meaning ‘cloud(s)’ to create another item which is the name of the largest city in the Mixtepec-Mixtec speaking area. ʃnũ˥˩. βi˥.ko˥˩‘bring down (from)’+’cloud(s)’‘San Juan de Mixtepec (lit. ‘bring down from the clouds’) 


This extension is likely related to that in which 'face' is through metonymy extended to include not the the individuals face, but their entire physical person (as in the earlier example: 'look at Maria'/'look at Maria's face').ntsi˥˩.ka˥   ŋk̬a˥˩     ti˩˥.ju˥˩.sa˩˥   ra˥˩    nũː˥˩   ŋk̬a˩˥-ju˥˩chest(=far)  be.located=3   tree     conj   face   be.located=1s‘the tree is far away from me’(MIX)

ADPOS(prox)  V(loc)  A(loc)  conj  BPT(tr)  (V(loc)-A(lm))
  já.ʧi ŋk̬àá    tí.jù.sá   ra   nũ̀  ŋk̬àá-jùnear  be.loc.3s.inf   tree    conj face  be.loc-1s‘the tree is close to where I amNo spatial relationship evident in construction:In the following example, ‘face’ is used to mark the speaker as the least ‘agent-like’ participant in a comparative statement. This fact is syntactically marked by the attatchment of the topic marker ‘-ɣa˩˥’ to the end of the item meaning ‘siblings’:ɲá.nì  we-tã́.ʔã̀-ɣá  nũ̀ːbe.elder  pl-sibling-tpc  face=1‘my siblings are elder than me’

In this example, the referent landmark 'the rock' does has no fundamental portion which is associated with being the FRONT-REGION, or as Valoise would describe it, a "General Orientation". Which in terms of cognitive semantic theory would likely mean that this is due to the fact that speakers of YM have not developed a need to distinguish such a schema, or "Complex Primitive" for rocks. Thus, what may be at work in the cognitive process in which we 'face' in relation to the rock is that the
ŋk̬áà    ʧà.lù:.ɣá  nũ̀   jùːbe.loc    boy      face      rock  ‘the boy is on the rock’

Mouth
Examples such as the following seemingly provide support to the view of Brugman & Macaulay that the spatial relationship is expressed by the verb. As this is the only difference from the previous example seemingly expressing the inverse action:ndà.kòó  ʧú.mì-ɣá   nũ̀   tì.jù.tsácmpl/arise.3s.inf  owl-tpc  face  tree‘the owl arose (flew) out of the tree’(closest thing to ‘flew out of/away from the tree’)ndà.va   t̪i.ku.ʧi-ɣá   nì-nd̪ì.βí-a     nũ̀ː    ka.vaCPL\fly.3s.inf  bat-tpc CMPL-enter-3s.inf   face  cave ‘the bat flew into the cave (=’the bat flew to the cave and entered’)But the BPT ‘mouth’ is used instead where the goal has an interior, but not entered:ndà.va   t̪i.ku.ʧi-ɣá    juː  ká.vàCPL\fly.3s.inf  bat-tpc.3s.inf   mouth  cave ‘the bat flew to the cave(=’the bat flew to the opening/mouth of the cave’ (but didn’t enter))



Spatial Relations Body Parts:

	In these next examples are some MIX linguistic descriptions of the relative configuration of various parts of the body to one another. Herein, there are several very noteworthy peices of interesting information which I believe serve to deepen the body of evidence towards the thesis<<<<<. First, in MIX there is no direct linguistic equivalent of the English of'part of', instead, the relationship is simply described in relative terms that will grammatically reflect the conceptual relationship should one exist. It is also note worthy that:

	In producing these utterances, the speaker is strongly inclined to use the second person singular possesive form of the body parts in question, while strongly dis-preferring the first person form (which accounts for the discrepency in the lexical forms for some of these BPT between these and previous examples in which the term was not inflected for that person). This linguistic preference reflects the fact that most, if not all of a speaker's embodied experience describing the relative location of the parts of the human body in their language are within the context of communicating these ideas to children! Although it is possible to produce the equivalent inflected for the first person, there is no practical reason why someone in any language would be saying to themselves using verbalized language "my face is on my head", "my head is on top, and my feet are on bottom", etc.!

Finally, there were some relationships that could not be described within the confines of a single or multi-claused utterance. Whereas in examples such as (#head-foot#,#back-butt#,ect.) there is clearly a contrasting relationship between the given parts, the relationship can be expressed in a construction which grammatically delineates these contrasting peices of information with a conjunction 'ɾa' placed in between the two clauses.

Given the prolific deployment of such items as 'head'-'foot', 'face'-'back', etc, in spatially contrastive roles, according to the conceptual framework adopted in this study, this should serve as evidence of a conceptual connection present that motivates the consistant use of these types of contrastive extensions.

in the polysemous forms which are discussed herein, the speaker could only describe them which did not grammatically encode any kind of relationship between the given parts.


Contrast in Spatial/ Relative Location
(##) head relative to feet
ʧí.kù.ʧí   ŋk̬àá      ʃì-nṹ́      ɾa    ʧí.nì.nũ̀  ŋk̬àá        tsà-ʔú
above   be.located head-2s.inf conj    below  be.located  foot-2s.inf‘the head is above, your feet are below’


Subpart
	Below, is the MIX description of the spatial relationships between part-whole relations. 

(##) face relative to head
nũ̀ː-ɣú       ŋk̬à-ʔĩ̀             ʃì-nṹ́face-2s.inf be.located-2s.inf head-2s.inf
'your face is on your head'

(##) ears relative to head

 só'o-ɣú ŋk̬à-'ì ʃì-nú                
  gloss  ear-2s.inf BE.LOC-3s.inf head-2s.inf 


(##) back relative to butt

ʧí.kù.ʧí   ŋk̬àá    sa.tú        ɾa    ʧí.nì.nũ̀   ŋk̬àá      ʃì.ʧá-ɣú
above   be.located back-2s.inf conj   below    be.located  butt-2s.inf
(lit.) 'your back is above, your butt is below'
